# The effect of constant light on sleep

## Introduction

What trying to say? 
Sleep is super important 

Sleep is disrupted by abnormal light 
Evidence of light disruption

Disruption via both circadian and homeostatic mechanisms
Evidence of light affecting circadian
Evidence of light affecting homeostatic


Light affects both homeostatic regulation and circadian regulation
Here we examined the effect of constant light on sleep?

4-5 paragraphs


Sleep is a reversible behavioral state of perceptual disengagement from
and unresponsiveness to the environment, that appears universally
required for complex organisms ([Meir H. Kryger, Roth, and Dement
2017](#ref-meir_h._kryger_principles_2017); [Cirelli and Tononi
2008](#ref-cirelli_is_2008)), and extended sleep deprivation can
eventually lead to death([Everson 1995](#ref-everson_functional_1995)).
Sleep is regulated by both a homeostatic and a circadian system([Borbély
et al. 2016](#ref-borbely_two-process_2016)).

### Homeostatic regulation

The homeostatic regulation of sleep represents a general level of sleep
that is required for an organism. This expresses itself as a set-point
of sleep that is required over a roughly 24 hour period. When deprived
of sleep, there is a subsequent increase in sleep to
compensate([Porkka-Heiskanen 2013](#ref-porkka-heiskanen_sleep_2013)).
Importantly, sleep has both a duration and an intensity
dimension([Deboer 2018](#ref-deboer_sleep_2018)). The intensity of sleep
is conceptualised as sleep depth, which is behaviourally expressed as an
increased arousal threshold, and is well correlated with power of slow
waves during NREM sleep([Deboer 2015](#ref-deboer_behavioral_2015)),
which are increased after sleep deprivation, such that despite changes
in the duration and timing of sleep, the total amount of slow waves
accumulated remains the same([Deboer 2018](#ref-deboer_sleep_2018);
[Northeast et al. 2019](#ref-northeast_sleep_2019)). The mechanisms
behind this are currently unclear. A variety of putative sleep factors
build up in the brain during sleep and dissipate during wake, such as
levels of adenosine ([Porkka-Heiskanen
2013](#ref-porkka-heiskanen_sleep_2013); [Schwartz and Kilduff
2015](#ref-schwartz_neurobiology_2015)), which may modulate the network
of sleep/wake centres in the brain. Another potential mechanism is via
changes in synaptic strength that occur during wakefulness and are
re-normalised during sleep, termed the synaptic homeostasis
hypothesis([Tononi and Cirelli 2003](#ref-tononi_sleep_2003); [Vladyslav
V. Vyazovskiy 2015](#ref-vyazovskiy_sleep_2015)). Importantly, the
accumulation of homeostatic sleep need can be affected by waking
experience([Fisher et al. 2016](#ref-fisher_stereotypic_2016)), and
there is evidence that the slow wave activity (SWA) increase in response
to sleep deprivation is larger in darkness than light in nocturnal
rodents ([Huber, Tononi, and Cirelli 2007](#ref-huber_exploratory_2007);
[V. V. Vyazovskiy, Achermann, and Tobler
2007](#ref-vyazovskiy_sleep_2007)), however this may be due to
differences in waking behaviour rather than a direct effect of
light([Huber, Tononi, and Cirelli 2007](#ref-huber_exploratory_2007)).
While light can induce sleep in nocturnal rodents([Lupi et al.
2008](#ref-lupi_acute_2008)), it is unknown whether this alters its
homeostatic regulation.

### Circadian regulation

The circadian regulation of sleep promotes waking and sleep at different
parts of the day. The signal primarily comes from the SCN, as lesions of
the SCN lead to arrhythmic sleep([Trachsel et al.
1992](#ref-trachsel_sleep_1992)). What signal does the SCN provide to
segregate sleeping across the day this way? This is currently unknown.
The SCN is a group of about 20,000 neurons that each have their own
molecular transcription based clocks, and together produce rhythms in
electrical firing across the day([Herzog et al.
2017](#ref-herzog_regulating_2017); [Coomans et al.
2013](#ref-coomans_detrimental_2013)), though how these molecular
rhythms translate to differences in neuronal firing is also currently
unclear([Colwell 2011](#ref-colwell_linking_2011)). The SCN can provide
a timing signal via both anatomical connections, as well as secreted
factors, as a transplanted SCN isolated from anatomical connections can
still orchestrate timing in the recipient([Silver et al.
1996](#ref-silver_diffusible_1996)). Lesions of the SCN can increase the
total time asleep in mice, squirrel monkeys, and Siberian
hamsters([Easton et al. 2004](#ref-easton_suprachiasmatic_2004); [Edgar,
Dement, and Fuller 1993](#ref-edgar_effect_1993); [Larkin et al.
2004](#ref-larkin_homeostatic_2004)), but not in rats([Trachsel et al.
1992](#ref-trachsel_sleep_1992)). Data in humans shows a drive for wake
when sleep pressure is highest([Dijk and Czeisler
1994](#ref-dijk_paradoxical_1994)). Some interpret this as the SCN
providing a primarily wake-promoting signal, while others suggest the
SCN promotes wake and sleep at different times of day([Mistlberger
2005](#ref-mistlberger_circadian_2005); [Scammell, Arrigoni, and Lipton
2017](#ref-scammell_neural_2017)). Desynchrony of different parts of the
SCN under abnormal T cycles show that rhythms of REM sleep are
associated with clock gene expression in the dorsomedial SCN([Lee,
Swanson, and de la Iglesia 2009](#ref-lee_circadian_2009)). Whether this
is due to changes in firing or other factors is unknown. The SCN
projects to several hypothalamic nuclei, including the sleep regulating
VLPO([Watts, Swanson, and Sanchez-Watts 1987](#ref-watts_efferent_1987);
[Sollars and Pickard 2015](#ref-sollars_neurobiology_2015)). The main
hypothalamic projection of the SCN is to the subparaventricular zone and
dorsomedial nuclei of the hypothalamus. These are key nodes mediating
the circadian control of sleep as lesions of the ventral SPZ eliminate
circadian rhythms in sleep and locomotor activity([Lu et al.
2001](#ref-lu_contrasting_2001)), as do lesions of the DMH([Chou et al.
2003](#ref-chou_critical_2003)).

### Direct effects of light

Light can directly induce sleep in nocturnal rodents([Lupi et al.
2008](#ref-lupi_acute_2008)), though this only occurs at certain
circadian phases([Muindi et al. 2013](#ref-muindi_acute_2013)). How
light does this is currently unclear. pRGCs in the retina can regulate
the direct effects of light on sleep separately from their circadian
effects([Rupp et al. 2019](#ref-rupp_distinct_2019)). Although they also
appear to regulate baseline levels of homeostatic sleep pressure and
response to sleep deprivation([Tsai et al.
2009](#ref-tsai_melanopsin_2009)). pRGCs project widely throughout the
brain, but importantly project to both the VLPO and SPZ, areas important
for sleep regulation([Muindi, Zeitzer, and Heller
2014](#ref-muindi_retino-hypothalamic_2014); [Lu et al.
2001](#ref-lu_contrasting_2001)).

### Constant light and sleep

Constant light alters sleep timing and distribution, in line with the
changes in their internal period([Eastman and Rechtschaffen
1983](#ref-eastman_circadian_1983)). The literature on constant light is
currently mixed. Some reports show increased total sleep, NREM and REM
sleep, and decreased wake in rats([Borbély and Neuhaus
1978](#ref-borbely_circadian_1978); [Lobo et al.
1999](#ref-lobo_hypoprolactinemic_1999)), others show increased NREM but
decreased REM sleep in rats([Stephenson et al.
2012](#ref-stephenson_sleep-wake_2012)), another report shows a trend to
similar findings in mice but this is not consistent across
strains([Mitler et al. 1977](#ref-mitler_sleep_1977)), and others show
decreased total sleep, NREM and REM in rats([Fishman and Roffwarg
1972](#ref-fishman_rem_1972)). A final study failed to show any changes
in duration of NREM or REM sleep in rats, but used very low light
levels([Ikeda, Sagara, and Inoué 2000](#ref-ikeda_continuous_2000)).
Differences in the lights used for housing may explain the differences
reported, with some using incandescent([Fishman and Roffwarg
1972](#ref-fishman_rem_1972)), others fluorescent([Mitler et al.
1977](#ref-mitler_sleep_1977)), and others neon lights([Borbély and
Neuhaus 1978](#ref-borbely_circadian_1978)), which all produce different
spectra, and therefore lead to different activation of melanopsin even
at the same lux levels([Peirson et al. 2018](#ref-peirson_light_2018)).
The most consistent finding is an increase in NREM sleep, whereas the
effect on REM sleep is less clear. Furthermore, while these reports have
all investigated the time in each state, less focus has been paid to the
spectrum. Sleep has both a time and an intensity component, therefore it
is crucial to investigate the effect of constant light on the spectrum
of sleep.

### Aim

Overall, light regulates sleep through a complex interaction of
homeostatic, circadian, and direct effects of light, which are difficult
to disentangle. Constant light causes disruption of the circadian
system, see chapter 2, as well as providing light at all times of the
circadian cycle. We therefore set out to examine the effects of constant
light on the regulation of both sleep timing and intensity.

## Methods

### Animals

All procedures were performed in accordance with the United Kingdom
Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986, under project licence
P828B64BC, and personal licence I14C9C2DE. All procedures complied with
the University of Oxford Policy on the use of animals in research. Young
male C57BL/6N mice were obtained from Envigo (Alconbury UK). All mice
were 8 weeks old at the time of surgery. A total of 10 animals were
surgically implanted with EEG/EMG recording equipment, with the aim of
obtaining recordings from 8 mice, which was the limit of what could be
obtained using the equipment available. Unfortunately due to technical
issues, only 7 animals were recorded for the experiment. Animals were
group housed until they underwent surgery, when they were singly housed
in individual ventilated cages, with *ad libitum* access to food and
water. 2 weeks after surgery animals were transferred to custom made
individual plexiglass experimental cages (20.3 x 32 x 35 cm) where they
were individually housed throughout the experiment with *ad libitum*
access to food and water. Experimental cages were kept in a ventilated
sound-attenuated Faraday chamber (campden instruments, 2 cages per
chamber), under white LED lighting at 100--120 lux at cage bottom height
while the lights were switched on. Room temperature and relative
humidity were maintained at 22 +/-1C and 50+/-20% respectively.

### Experimental design

The experimental design is outlined in figure
[\[fig:design\]](#fig:design). Animals underwent surgical implantation
of recording devices, then were allowed to recover for 2 weeks before
being transferred to recording chambers. Initially, animals were housed
under a standard 12:12h LD cycle for habituation and baseline
recordings. Animals were housed in the recording chambers for 2 days to
habituate to the recording cables before 2 days of baseline recordings
were obtained. After the baseline recordings, animals underwent 14 days
of constant light (LL), before being transferred back to 2 days of 12:12
LD. All animals were culled at the end of the experiment. EEG and EMG
were recorded during baseline, LL, and return to LD. The locomotor
activity of the animals was also recorded using the COMPASS
system([Brown et al. 2017](#ref-brown_compass_2017)). Mice were checked
at randomly selected times during the working day (0700h to 1600) to
ensure there was no signal they could entrain to.

### Electroencephalogram recordings

Surgical recordings were performed as previously described([Fisher et
al. 2016](#ref-fisher_stereotypic_2016)). Surgical procedures were
performed under aseptic conditions under isofluorane anaesthesia (3-5%
induction, 1-2% maintenance). Before surgery, animals were provided with
analgesia (meloxicam 1--2mg/kg SC, buprenorphine 0.08mg/kg SC). EEG
screw electrodes were implanted unilaterally in the right frontal
(anterior-posterior 2mm, mediolateral 2mm), and occipital
(anteroposterior -3.5mm, mediolateral 2.5mm) cortices, coordinates given
relative to bregma. A reference electrode was implanted above the
cerebellum in the midline, and a ground screw was placed contralaterally
to the occipital electrode. Single stranded stainless steel wires were
implanted on either side of the nuchal muscle to record electromyogram.
All electrodes were attached to a custom-made head-mount (Pinnacle
Technology), and attached to the skull using dental acrylic.
Post-surgery mice were monitored closely and provided with analgesia as
necessary (meloxicam 1--2mg/kg sid for 3 days, buprenorphine 0.08mg/kg
PRN), until they returned to normal.

### Signal processing

A Tucker-Davis technologies Multichannel Neurophysiology Recording
System was used for data acquisition. Cortical EEG was recorded from
both the frontal and occipital derivations. EEG and EMG were filtered
between 0.1Hz and 100Hz, amplified (PZ5 NeuroDigitizer preamplifier,
Tucker-Davis Technologies), and stored on a local computer at a sampling
rate of 256.9 Hz. EEG and EMG were resampled offline at 256Hz, and
converted into European Data Fomat using custom MATLAB scripts available
at [https://github
.com/A-Fisk/VVlab_Scripts](https://github%20.com/A-Fisk/VVlab_Scripts),
and the open source Neurotraces software. Recordings were split into 4
second epochs, and vigilance states scored offline by manual inspection
using SleepSign for animals <http://www.sleepsign.com/>. Vigilance
states were classified as wake (low-voltage, high-frequency EEG, with
high or phasic EMG activity), NREM (EEG slow waves with high amplitude
and low frequency), or REM sleep (low-voltage, high-frequency EEG with
low EMG activity), based upon visual inspection of the two EEG channels
and the EMG channel. Artifacts, caused by movement in any channel, were
also scored to facilitate analysis. The data were then exported as power
spectra per epoch, computed by FFT using a Hanning window.

### Data analysis

All analysis was written using custom scripts available online at
<https://github.com/A-Fisk/sleepPy>, [https://github
.com/A-Fisk/03_lleeg](https://github%20.com/A-Fisk/03_lleeg), using a
combination of MATLAB and Python. Baseline days were the last day of
normal 12:12 LD, defined from the start of lights on (ZT0), then at
least the first two days of LL were scored for all animals. Statistics
were performed using the pingouin package
<https://pingouin-stats.org/api.html>. Mixed ANOVAs were performed,
followed by post-hoc tukey testing as stated in results.

## Results

### Overview of constant light effects on activity and sleep

We recorded EEG from 7 animals under a baseline day of 12:12 LD,
followed by 14 days of continous light exposure (LL), and then a further
48 hours of LD. We also recorded PIR based activity from animals at the
same time. A representative example of both is shown in figure
[\[fig:design\]](#fig:design). In the PIR activity, we see a prolonged
period as the animals free run under constant light, and a reduced level
of activity, which is not rescued by the return to LD. In figure
[\[fig:design\]](#fig:design) C, we see EEG and EMG variance as a proxy
marker of sleep and wake. When EEG variance is high and EMG variance is
low, the animal is likely to be in NREM sleep due to the presence of
slow waves and behavioural immobility; when EEG variance is low and EMG
variance is high, the animal is likely to be in active wake. We see a
similar pattern in the variance profile, with a shorter activity period
that free runs throughout the LL period. In this example at least, when
the PIR activity is reduced, the EEG variance stays high, indicating
that this animal is likely asleep instead of awake but inactive.

### Constant light increases sleep

We next looked in more detail at the sleep by manually scoring the
baseline day and the first two days of LL for vigilance states. Time
constraints prevented us from scoring further days under LL. To see an
overview of the effect on sleep distribution and intensity, we plooted a
hypnogram of SWA over the first two days of LL, coloured by vigilance
state, an example of which is shown in figure
[\[fig:hypnogram\]](#fig:hypnogram) A, B, and C. In the baseline day we
see the expected reduction in SWA during the light phase as the animal
is asleep, followed by long activity episodes once the lights turn off,
and increased SWA in the subsequent sleep episodes. In both B and C, we
see a similar pattern in the subjective light phase, with reducing SWA
during NREM sleep in the subjective light phase, however when the lights
fail to turn off the animals then remain intermittently asleep for the
next 6 hours, before having a major activity episode followed by
increased SWA.

To quantify this increase in sleep, we calculated the time spent in each
state, sleep, NREM sleep, REM sleep, and Wake, across each 24 hours, as
well as during the subjective light and dark phases, shown in figure
[\[fig:hypnogram\]](#fig:hypnogram) D, E, F, G. We asked whether the
amount of time in each stage was affected by the day using a repeated
measure ANOVA, followed by pairwise post-hoc tukey testing, for the
total 24 hours, subjective light and subjective dark phase.

For total sleep, we find an increase on day 1 and day 2 of 1.57 and 1.19
hours respectively (ANOVA, F(2, 12)=16.418, p=0.00037, post-hoc tukey
difference from baseline p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 both). In the
subjective light phase, we do not see a difference between the days
(ANOVA, F(2, 12)=3.55, p=0.06), however in the subjective dark phase,
there is a difference, with day 1 and day 2 increased by 1.57 and 1.48
hours respectivly (ANOVA, F(2, 12)=26.31, p=4.1e-5, post-hoc tukey,
p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 both).

For NREM sleep we see a similar pattern, with increased across 24 hours
of 1 .39 and 1.09 hours for day 1 and 2 respectively (ANOVA, F(2,
12)=11.02, p=0 .002, post-hoc p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 both), no change
during the subjective light (ANOVA, F (2, 12)=1.27, p=0.32), and an
increase of 1.39 and 1.29 for day 1 and day 2 in the subjective dark
phase (ANOVA, F(2, 12)=26.15, p=4.22e-5, post-hoc p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0
.05 both).

When looking just at REM sleep, we do not detect an increase across 24
hours (ANOVA, F(2, 12)=3.57, p=0.061), which is also true for the
subjective light phase (ANOVA, F(2, 12)=1.04, p=0.38), however we do see
an increase of 0.18 and 0.19 hours on day 1 and day 2 when looking just
at the subjective dark phase (ANOVA, F(2, 12)=8.74, p=0.0046, post-hoc
p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 both).

Finally we looked at total time spent awake, which as expected, shows
the inverse pattern to total sleep time, with decreases of 1.57 and 1.05
hours across the whole 24 hours (ANOVA, F(2, 12)=14.84, p=0.00057,
post-hoc p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 both). We do detect a difference in
the subjective light period (ANOVA, F(2, 12)=6 .99, p=0.0097), but
post-hoc testing failed to detect differences between the days
(p$>$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 both days). In the subjective dark period, we
see decreases of 1.58 and 1.47 hours on day 1 and 2 respectively (ANOVA,
F(2, 12)=26.26, p=4.14e-5, post-hoc p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 both).

We therefore find increases in total sleep, NREM sleep, and REM sleep,
and a decrease in time spent awake in response short term exposure to
constant light, mainly localised to the subjective dark period when the
light exposure is abnormal.

### Increased sleep is regulated homeostatically

We have so far shown that constant light induces sleep in the first two
days of exposure. Next we asked how this sleep is regulated. Sleep is
regulated in a circadian and a homeostatic manner, the circadian system
leads to enhanced tendency to sleep at certain times of day, and the
homeostatic regulation leads to a build up of sleep pressure which is
dissipated by sleep. Homeostatic regulation incorporates two aspects of
sleep, sleep time and sleep intensity. Sleep time is easily measured by
scoring of the EEG, sleep intensity is measured by the power in the
delta frequency band (0.5-4Hz), termed slow wave activity as this is
mainly compromised of the characteristic slow waves seen in NREM sleep.

We therefore asked about the sleep timing and sleep intensity. Figure
[\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative) A looks at total sleep duration.
We asked whether the percentage of each hour spent asleep across each
hour, was different for each day, using a two-way repeated measures
ANOVA of sleep % h̃our\*day, taking into account each animal, with
pairwise post-hoc tukey testing for each hour. We find that there is a
difference between the days and hours (ANOVA, interaction F(48,
288)=5.51, p=9.71e-21). Post-hoc testing shows that this is due to day 1
differing from baseline at hours 12-17, and day 2 at hours 11-17. Day 1
had isolated differences at hours 2 and 22, while day 2 was different at
hour 7 (post-hoc tukey p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 all). The majority of
the difference therefore occurs at the transition to the subjective dark
phase.

Given that sleep pressure is dissipated during NREM sleep, we therefore
plotted the cumulative NREM sleep time over each day, as shown in figure
[\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative) B. We have already shown in figure
 [\[fig:hypnogram\]](#fig:hypnogram) an increase in NREM sleep over 24
hours, and we see that here too as the total NREM sleep is increased.
However, when we look at the timecourse, we see that the animals
continue to gain NREM sleep at the start of the subjective dark period,
and continue to do so throughout the subjective dark to lead to the
higher total amount of sleep. This leads to differences from baseline
for both day 1 and day 2 at hours 14-23 (pairwise post-hoc tukey
p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 all).

We next looked at the intensity of sleep, by looking at relative SWA.
The timecourse of SWA is shown in figure
[\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative) C. We calculated the mean SWA
during NREM as a % of the mean SWA for the baseline day for each animal,
excluding any hours which had $<$`<!-- -->`{=html}5 minutes of NREM
sleep. On the baseline day, we see the expected pattern of a decrease
during the light phase as animals sleep and dissipate sleep pressure,
with a rise at the start of the dark phase, which is maintained during
the dark phase as animals are awake and accumulating sleep pressure. On
day 1 and day 2, we also see a normal decrease in SWA during the
subjective light phase, however at the start of the subjective dark
phase the SWA remains low, increasing on day 1 faster than on day 2,
then increasing once animals wake up and start accumulating sleep
pressure again. We then asked whether the SWA was different for each
hour and day, using a two-way ANOVA followed by pairwise tukey post-hoc
testing. We were unable to use a repeated measures ANOVA, as removing
hours with $<$`<!-- -->`{=html}5 minutes of NREM sleep led to missing
values. We find a difference between the days and hours (ANOVA,
interaction F(2, 48) =1.82, p=0.0013), indicating the time-course of SWA
is not the same for each day. Post-hoc testing showed that on day 1
there are differences from baseline at hour 8, and 14, and on day 2
there are differences at hour 14, 15, and 22 (post-hoc tukey
p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 all). The large error bars indicate high
variance at each time point, but the consistent finding is that at the
start of the subjective dark phase, while animals are still asleep under
LL, their SWA is lower than during the baseline day.

Finally we asked whether the SWA was regulated homeostatically. If it is
homeostatically regulated then there is a set amount of slow waves it
should get across the 24 hours, and despite increases in the duration of
NREM sleep the decreased intensity of that sleep means they return to
the same set point. We therefore plotted the total SWA during NREM sleep
accumulated over the day, termed slow wave energy (SWE), as shown in
figure [\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative)D, as a percentage of the
maximum value each animal reached at the end of the baseline day. We
asked whether the total amount of SWE the animals experienced across 24
hours, was altered by the days, using a repeated measures one-way ANOVA
on the maximum values for each day. We find that there is no difference
between the maximum SWE across the days (ANOVA, F(2, 10)=1.77, p=0.22).
When looking at the cumulative graph of SWE in figure
[\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative) D, we see that the intensity
changes compensated for the increased duration of NREM sleep during the
subjective dark phase.

We therefore find that constant light induces sleep in the first 5 hours
of the subjective dark phase, but there is no alteration to the
homeostatic regulation of sleep across 24 hours.

### Architecture of light induced sleep

Finally, we asked whether we could detect any changes in the sleep that
was induced between hours 12-17.

First, we looked at the spectrum of NREM sleep during that time period,
as shown in figure [\[fig:spectra\]](#fig:spectra)A. We used a two-way
repeated measures ANOVA to ask if the power was affected by the day at
each frequency bin. We found no difference between the different days
across frequencies (ANOVA, interaction F(160, 810)=-5.07, p=1). While in
figure[\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative)C, we found differences in
relative SWA at this time, here across the whole absolute spectrum of
NREM sleep during the 6 hours where sleep was induced, we do not see a
difference. Referring to figure[\[fig:spectra\]](#fig:spectra)A, there
is a trend to decreased power in the SWA frequencies (0.5-4Hz), but we
failed to see an effect here, likely due to no change in the remaining
frequencies.

Next we looked to see if the sleep was fragmented, by looking at the
number and duration of NREM episodes, as shown in figure
[\[fig:spectra\]](#fig:spectra) B and C respectively. We asked whether
the number and duration was affected by day at different times using a
two-way repeated measures ANOVA, with pairwise post-hoc tukey testing at
each time. We find that the number of NREM episodes is affected (ANOVA,
interaction F(46, 276)=2.84, p=7.78e-8), on day 1 and 2, and the hours
12-16 are increased compared to baseline (post-hoc tukey
p$<$`<!-- -->`{=html}0.05 all). We find that the mean duration of NREM
episodes is not affected differently by day, or by hour (ANOVA,
interaction F(46, 230)=0.90, p=0.65, time F(23, 115)=0.43, p=0.99).

We therefore find that light induces sleep by increasing the number of
NREM episodes during the first 5 hours of the subjective dark period,
but they are of similar duration to during the subjective light period,
and the overall spectrum is also comparable.

## Discussion

### Key findings

Here we show that housing mice under constant light induces both NREM
and REM sleep over the first two days, but that sleep is regulated
homeostatically and appears similar to sleep during the subjetive light
phase.

#### Sleep induction

We show in figure [\[fig:hypnogram\]](#fig:hypnogram), that there is an
increase of 1.5 hours of total sleep in the first two days of LL,
composed of increases in both NREM and REM sleep during the subjective
dark phase. This agrees with previous findings reporting increases in
both NREM and REM sleep in rats([Borbély and Neuhaus
1978](#ref-borbely_circadian_1978); [Lobo et al.
1999](#ref-lobo_hypoprolactinemic_1999)), however it contradicts
findings of decreased REM sleep in rats and mice([Mitler et al.
1977](#ref-mitler_sleep_1977); [Stephenson et al.
2012](#ref-stephenson_sleep-wake_2012)), and decreased NREM and REM
sleep in rats([Fishman and Roffwarg 1972](#ref-fishman_rem_1972)). We
did not find an effect on REM sleep when looking across the entire 24
hours, but only found an increase in REM sleep during the subjective
dark phase. We used LED lights at 100-120 lux, while previous reports
have used a variety of different light sources and not reported their
light levels. Furthermore, previous reports have used different rat
strains, and this is the first report of the effect of constant light on
sleep in mice to show increased sleep.

#### Regulation of induced sleep

In figure [\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative), we show that although
the duration of NREM sleep is increased during the first two days under
LL, the intensity of sleep compensates for the increased duration. This
leads to the total amount of SWE accumulated over 24 hours staying
constant. This is similar to other reports where altering the daily
organisation of sleep-wake behaviours did not alter the total amount of
SWE accumulated over the day in mice([Northeast et al.
2019](#ref-northeast_sleep_2019)), although interestingly that report
showed that total SWE was altered for the first few days under
restricted feeding, and only demonstrated equivalence to baseline after
7 days of habituation. This is in contrast to our findings where we see
immediate changes in the first two days of exposure to the light cycle.

#### Architecture of induced sleep

Since we found LL induced sleep between CT 12 and CT 17, but this was
regulated homeostatically to not alter the total amount of SWE
accumulated over the day, we then asked if there was any difference in
the sleep induced during this time period.

We compared the spectra of NREM sleep between the baseline day, and the
subsequent days during CT 12-17. We found no differences in the absolute
spectrum across days. This is different to the findings of figure
[\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative), which found changes in relative
SWA at this time. We are comparing the entire absolute spectrum in
figure [\[fig:spectra\]](#fig:spectra) A, instead of just the subset
which makes up SWA. Indeed when looking figure
[\[fig:spectra\]](#fig:spectra)A, there appears to lower levels around
the SWA frequency band under LL, but when combined with the rest of the
frequencies in the spectrum we did find evidence of an effect. We took
CT 12-17 for the baseline day as the time to compare against, however
this is a time when there is little sleep during the baseline day, while
the first two days in LL are predominantly sleep. This answers the
question of what the difference is in sleep between the three days at
this time. A future comparison that may be useful would be the last hour
of the light period on the baseline day, as this is the equivalent of a
sleep-dominated, but low sleep-pressure period of sleep.

Finally, we looked at the number and duration of NREM sleep episodes. We
see increased number of NREM episodes compared to baseline at CT 12-16,
but this is roughly the same number of episodes as during the subjective
light phase. We see no change in the mean duration NREM episodes under
LL. There is no change in the mean duration of NREM episodes across the
day either, indicating the change in time in NREM sleep is due to
changes in the number of episodes, not in their duration.

Overall, we show that constant light induces  1.5 hours extra sleep
across the first 5 hours of the subjective dark period. This extra sleep
is homeostatically compensated to allow a normal amount of SWE
accumulation throughout the day, and has similar architecture to sleep
during the subjective light phase.

### Potential mechanisms

Sleep is affected by circadian regulation, homeostatic regulation, and
direct effects of light. Here we outline the evidence of the involvement
of each of these on the effects we see under constant light.

#### Circadian mechanisms

The locus of the circadian control of sleep and wake, similar to most
other functions, is the SCN([Ralph et al.
1990](#ref-ralph_transplanted_1990); [Scammell, Arrigoni, and Lipton
2017](#ref-scammell_neural_2017); [Mistlberger
2005](#ref-mistlberger_circadian_2005)). An important output signal is
the electrophysiological firing rate, as optogenetically altering SCN
firing rate using dopamine receptor([Jones, Tackenberg, and McMahon
2015](#ref-jones_manipulating_2015)), or vasoactive intestinal
peptide([Mazuski et al. 2018](#ref-mazuski_entrainment_2018)) driven ion
channels is enough to entrain locomotor activity rhythms. The SCN
projects to the VLPO, as well as SPZ and DMH which are also crucial for
the circadian rhythms of sleep and wake([Watts, Swanson, and
Sanchez-Watts 1987](#ref-watts_efferent_1987); [Sollars and Pickard
2015](#ref-sollars_neurobiology_2015); [Lu et al.
2001](#ref-lu_contrasting_2001); [Chou et al.
2003](#ref-chou_critical_2003)). Under constant light, the rhythms of
SCN firing become flattened in mice([Coomans et al.
2013](#ref-coomans_detrimental_2013)), staying above baseline
dark-period levels, due to reducd synchrony among SCN neurons([Hughes et
al. 2015](#ref-hughes_constant_2015); [Ohta, Yamazaki, and McMahon
2005](#ref-ohta_constant_2005)). However, it is known that behavioural
state can alter the firing rate of the SCN([Deboer et al.
2003](#ref-deboer_sleep_2003)), therefore we do not know if the
alterations in firing rate seen in([Coomans et al.
2013](#ref-coomans_detrimental_2013)) are cause or consequence of
changes in sleep. Two optogenetic studies caused behavioural delays by
increasing SCN neuronal firing during the subjective night, and one
caused activity masking similar to light ([Jones, Tackenberg, and
McMahon 2015](#ref-jones_manipulating_2015); [Mazuski et al.
2018](#ref-mazuski_entrainment_2018)). Therefore the presence of extra
light during the start of the subjective dark phase may be increasing
the SCN firing rate which therefore increases sleep, possibly through
increased stimulation of the VLPO, or reduced wake-promotion through
other projections. This model is simplified as there is heterogeneity in
the firing patterns of neurons within the SCN([Mazuski et al.
2018](#ref-mazuski_entrainment_2018)), and there are also other
non-neuronal signals which can entrain rhythms of sleep and wake([Silver
et al. 1996](#ref-silver_diffusible_1996)), so it may be more
appropriate to say that constant light pushes the SCN to a more
'day-like' state, characterised by increased firing rates, which
promotes sleep.

#### Direct effects of light

Light directly induces sleep in nocturnal animals via melanopsin
expressing pRGCs ([Lupi et al. 2008](#ref-lupi_acute_2008); [Altimus et
al. 2008](#ref-altimus_rods-cones_2008); [Tsai et al.
2009](#ref-tsai_melanopsin_2009); [Muindi et al.
2013](#ref-muindi_acute_2013)). This effect is present during the
subjective light and the first half of the subjective dark phase([Muindi
et al. 2013](#ref-muindi_acute_2013); [Lupi et al.
2008](#ref-lupi_acute_2008); [Tsai et al.
2009](#ref-tsai_melanopsin_2009)), although Altimus et al([Altimus et
al. 2008](#ref-altimus_rods-cones_2008)) failed to show any sleep
induction effect in mice, but they used a T7 cycle, as opposed to T2 or
light pulses. The effects of prior sleep-wake history between these
different light cycles may confound these results([Muindi, Zeitzer, and
Heller 2014](#ref-muindi_retino-hypothalamic_2014)). This sleep
induction also appears to be capable of lasting up to 3 hours([Altimus
et al. 2008](#ref-altimus_rods-cones_2008)), and 6 hours of light at ZT
13-19 induces 1 hour of extra NREM sleep([Muindi et al.
2013](#ref-muindi_acute_2013)). The mechanisms by which light induces
sleep are currently unclear. pRGCs project both to the SCN and to
extra-SCN areas important for sleep and wake, including the VLPO and
lateral hypothalamus (LH)([Muindi, Zeitzer, and Heller
2014](#ref-muindi_retino-hypothalamic_2014); [Mistlberger
2005](#ref-mistlberger_circadian_2005)). These extra-SCN projections
appear to be neccesary for the acute light-induced sleep([Rupp et al.
2019](#ref-rupp_distinct_2019)), and light pulses induce FOS in the
VLPO([Lupi et al. 2008](#ref-lupi_acute_2008); [Tsai et al.
2009](#ref-tsai_melanopsin_2009)). This suggests that the increase in
sleep we see in the first 6 hours of the subjective dark period could be
due to light activating melanopsin expressing pRGCs which stimulate the
VLPO and induce sleep.

#### Homeostatic regulation of increased sleep

Sleep is regulated homeostatically, by both time and intensity. This is
represented by SWE, which maintains the same levels under LL over 24
hours despite changes in the time asleep([Northeast et al.
2019](#ref-northeast_sleep_2019)). It is unlikely that changes in
homeostatic sleep need are causing the increased sleep time, as that
sleep still has low SWA, as seen in
figure[\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative). Therefore we do not find
increased sleep need being the cause of increased sleep time.

Together, the changes we see are most likely due to a combination of
direct induction of sleep, with a small contribution of an altered
circadian sleep/wake signal, as we see an immediate effect. This is
primarily because the increase in NREM sleep that we see during the
subjective night in the first two days (1.39 and 1.29 hours
respectively), is slightly larger than the  1 hour induced by a 6 hour
light pulse during the subjective dark([Muindi et al.
2013](#ref-muindi_acute_2013)). We are assuming the difference between
these two values is due to both the increase in light duration, and
changes in the circadian sleep/wake signal.

### Implications

Here we show that constant light induces sleep at the start of the
subjective dark phase. We assume this is due to a direct light induced
effect, with a small contribution of a change in the circadian slee/wake
signal. We see no changes in homeostatic sleep pressure and conclude
that the extra sleep we see is not due to any change in sleep
homeostasis.

Sleep regulation is modelled by by a two-process model([Borbély et al.
2016](#ref-borbely_two-process_2016)), where the homeostatic process S
builds up as a function of prior wake and dissipates during sleep, while
the circadian process C varies to favour wake and sleep throughout the
day. While originally formulated for humans, lowering the upper
threshold for process S accumulation models the polyphasic sleep seen in
rodents([Daan, Beersma, and Borbély 1984](#ref-daan_timing_1984)).
Application of this model to SWA in rats suggested that there were
different dynamics to SWA accumulation during light and dark periods([V.
V. Vyazovskiy, Achermann, and Tobler 2007](#ref-vyazovskiy_sleep_2007)).
Furthermore there appears to be a circadian modulation of the SWA
dynamics in constant darkness([Deboer 2009](#ref-deboer_sleep_2009)).
Two elaborations of the two process model have been published recently.
The first elaborates the parameters predicting SWA to incorporate recent
history, and provides quantitative predictions of SWA across light,
dark, and different waking states ([Guillaumin et al.
2018](#ref-guillaumin_cortical_2018)). This model provides quantitative
predictions of SWA, which are highly accurate to empirical observations,
however it does not directly predict state or transitions. Another
recent model attempted to address this limitation by implementing a
stochastic markov-chain-model to predict duration and transition between
episodes of different states([Rempe et al.
2018](#ref-rempe_mathematical_2018)). This also provided accurate
predictions, however required parameter tuning based on the waking
state. This latter model had varied state transition and durations based
upon Process S and Process C. Our interpretation of our findings, is
that process S is not affected and alterations in process C provide a
minimal input to the changes we see. This second point is a major
assumption, but fits with the previously published literature([Coomans
et al. 2013](#ref-coomans_detrimental_2013)). Furthermore how light
induced sleep fits with the two-process model is still an important
outstanding question, given recent work showing that this requires
extra-SCN projections of pRGCs, i.e. the SCN does not directly mediate
the direct sleep induction by light([Rupp et al.
2019](#ref-rupp_distinct_2019)). Assuming that our results indicate
differences beyond changes that can be modelled by process S or process
C, where does this leave our mathematical models? While the sleep
induction effect of light has been studied well, how it fits into a
wider sleep regulation framework is less clear([Muindi, Zeitzer, and
Heller 2014](#ref-muindi_retino-hypothalamic_2014)). The Rempe et al
model([Rempe et al. 2018](#ref-rempe_mathematical_2018)) provides a
possible formalisation of the changes we see. The state transitions and
episode durations are already affected by Process C and Process S, and
therefore alterations of this stochastic process may be able to model
the prolongation of sleep we see under LL. Indeed, in agreement with
this, we see that episode duration of NREM sleep stays similar to during
the subjective light phase during the first few hours of constant light,
as seen in figure [\[fig:spectra\]](#fig:spectra). In the future, we
hope to see whether incorporating light environment in some way into
these models can capture the changes we see here.

### Limitations

#### Circadian vs Direct effects

The major limitation of the data presented here is we are unable to
determine whether the effects are due to changes in the circadian system
or due to the direct effects of light. We are assuming that they are
mainly due to the direct effects of light as we see similar sized
changes as previously reported([Muindi et al.
2013](#ref-muindi_acute_2013)). In order to address this, we would want
to alter one of these processes while not affecting the other, which is
difficult given their interrelated nature. Since extra-SCN projections
of pRGCs were found to be neccessary and sufficient for the direct
effects of light on sleep([Rupp et al. 2019](#ref-rupp_distinct_2019)),
performing our LL protocol in mice with either only SCN or extra-SCN
pRGC projections would indicate the extent of the direct effect of light
in our findings. Though this may be complicated by feedback onto the
circadian system from extra-SCN areas regulated by light. On the other
hand, our hypothesis that LL converts the SCN to a more day-like
functional state partially due to desynchrony between SCN neurons,
suggests that if we could induce this state separately to light input
then we would observe the SCN contribution to our findings. This may be
approached by using optogenetic approaches to alter the functional state
of the SCN in constant darkness([Jones, Tackenberg, and McMahon
2015](#ref-jones_manipulating_2015); [Mazuski et al.
2018](#ref-mazuski_entrainment_2018)). Alternatively, *Vipr2^-/-^* mice
have arrhythmic SCNs similar to those seen under constant light([Hughes
et al. 2015](#ref-hughes_constant_2015); [Ohta, Yamazaki, and McMahon
2005](#ref-ohta_constant_2005)), so their sleep under DD would provide
an insight into the effects of an arrhythmic SCN on sleep. Our
hypothesis suggests that either of these conditions would only
marginally alter the amount of sleep per day. This assumes that the
disruption of the circadian system is constant and does not alter over
time, which may not hold true ([Coomans et al.
2013](#ref-coomans_detrimental_2013)). Therefore over time, as the
circadian system becomes more impaired its effect may become more
pronounced. We can address this by looking at the effect of LL on sleep
after an extended period. We currently have the data to look at this
after 14 days of LL, however due to practical limitations of manual
sleep scoring, we were only able to look at the first 48 hours under LL.
To bolster this, we would need to perform this experiment while
measuring the circadian system, such as the firing rate of the SCN.

#### Sleep homeostasis

Our findings rest upon our interpretation that sleep homeostasis is
unchanged by our constant light protocol, as the levels of SWA remain
low during the induced sleep at the start of the subjective dark phase.
This is observational data, and so does not unequivocally show that
sleep homeostasis is unaffected. Sleep deprivation is commonly used to
investigate changes in sleep homeostasis([V. V. Vyazovskiy, Achermann,
and Tobler 2007](#ref-vyazovskiy_sleep_2007)). To investigate we would
need to ask two separate questions; What is the effect of constant light
on the accumulation of homeostatic sleep pressure? and what is the
effect on the dissipation of homeostatic sleep pressure? For the first
question, we would sleep deprive animals during ZT 12-18, the start of
the subjective dark phase, and look at the SWA accumulation. Light
environment is a contributor to homeostatic sleep need ([V. V.
Vyazovskiy, Achermann, and Tobler 2007](#ref-vyazovskiy_sleep_2007);
[Tsai et al. 2009](#ref-tsai_melanopsin_2009)), therefore we may see
changes in the build up of SWA. For the second question, we would sleep
deprive animals during ZT 6-12, the last 6 hours of the subjective light
phase, as we could then examine the dissipation of the artificially high
SWA.

#### Rhythmicity under LL

Constant light is well known to cause behavioural arrhythmicity, in
proportion to light intensity ([Chen et al.
2008](#ref-chen_strong_2008); [Aschoff
1960](#ref-aschoff_exogenous_1960)), due to desynchronisation of neurons
in the SCN([Ohta, Yamazaki, and McMahon 2005](#ref-ohta_constant_2005)).
We used 100-120 lux of white LED light, which did not induce behavioural
arrhythmicity. This light level is in line with some previous studies
looking at jetlag([Loh et al. 2010](#ref-loh_rapid_2010)), but below
previous studies that induced arrhythmicity in constant light([Ohta,
Yamazaki, and McMahon 2005](#ref-ohta_constant_2005); [Chen et al.
2008](#ref-chen_strong_2008)). While other studies induced arrhytmicity
using even lower light levels than we used here([Muñoz et al.
2005](#ref-munoz_long-term_2005); [Sudo et al.
2003](#ref-sudo_constant_2003)), they used different strains of mice to
us, which are known to affect light perception and circadian
behaviour([Peirson et al. 2018](#ref-peirson_light_2018)). Therefore we
may be seeing minor circadian effects as we have not fully disrupted the
SCN using LL. Arguing against this, are our findings from chapter 2,
which demonstrate that LL still causes major changes to circadian
activity. We would have to perform this experiment again under light
levels that do induce arrhythmicity to address this.

#### Data processing

We have measured all our markers against clock time, and have not
corrected for internal circadian time, despite constant light inducing
free-running. We did this due to time constraints of our data analysis.
Since we only examined the first 48 hours of constant light, we do not
believe this is majorly affecting our findings. The main evidence is
from figure [\[fig:cumulative\]](#fig:cumulative) which shows that even
on the second day in LL, there are only minor deviations from baseline
during the subjective light phase. As we examine further into LL, we
will have to correct for circadian phase.

### Future studies

Here we show that constant light induces sleep during the subjective
dark phase in the first two days, and that sleep is homeostatically
compensated. We assume that the majority of that sleep is due to direct
effects of light, with some contribution of alterations of the circadian
system. There are several future studies we suggest.

First, sleep at the end of an extended period of LL, when we assume the
circadian system is more disrupted, will provide information about the
relative contribution of direct effects of light and the circadian
system. We have this data and are working on analysing it. Second,
modelling how the changes we see fit in with both SWA, and state
prediction models([Guillaumin et al.
2018](#ref-guillaumin_cortical_2018); [Rempe et al.
2018](#ref-rempe_mathematical_2018)), will provide some quantitative
insight into how our findings fit with our current understanding of
sleep regulation. Third, performing sleep deprivation experiments to
confirm that the build up and dissipation of homeostatic sleep pressure
is normal under constant light. Finally, I have outlined a range of
suggestions for investigating the relative contribution of circadian and
direct effects of light in our protocol in the above sections. The most
productive is likely to be repeating these experiments using animals
where the direct effect or the circadian effect of sleep induction by
light is removed([Rupp et al. 2019](#ref-rupp_distinct_2019)). This
should be followed by performing this experiment under a range of light
levels to induce behavioural arrhythmicity, and therefore see if there
is a gradient in the effect of the circadian contribution.

## Conclusions

Here we show that constant light induces sleep during the subjective
dark phase in the first two days, and that sleep is homeostatically
compensated. We suggest that this is primarily due to a direct effect of
light on sleep, with a small contribution of an impaired circadian
system. This effect is not captured by the quantitative models we
currenlty employ of sleep regulation, and it will be of interest to see
how they can be adapted to fit our findings. Our findings rely on a
number of assumptions that we hope to be able to address with future
studies.

Altimus, C. M., A. D. Güler, K. L. Villa, D. S. McNeill, T. A. Legates,
and S. Hattar. 2008. "Rods-Cones and Melanopsin Detect Light and Dark to
Modulate Sleep Independent of Image Formation." *Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 105 (50):
19998--20003. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0808312105>.

Aschoff, J. 1960. "Exogenous and Endogenous Components in Circadian
Rhythms." *Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology* 25:
11--28.

Borbély, Alexander A., Serge Daan, Anna Wirz-Justice, and Tom Deboer.
2016. "The Two-Process Model of Sleep Regulation: A Reappraisal."
*Journal of Sleep Research* 25 (2): 131--43.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/jsr.12371>.

Borbély, Alexander A., and Hans Ulrich Neuhaus. 1978. "Circadian Rhythm
of Sleep and Motor Activity in the Rat During Skeleton Photoperiod,
Continuous Darkness and Continuous Light." *Journal of Comparative
Physiology* 128 (1): 37--46. <https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00668371>.

Brown, Laurence A., Sibah Hasan, Russell G. Foster, and Stuart N.
Peirson. 2017. "COMPASS: Continuous Open Mouse Phenotyping of Activity
and Sleep Status." *Wellcome Open Research* 1 (April): 2.
<https://doi.org/10.12688/wellcomeopenres.9892.2>.

Chen, Rongmin, Dong-Oh Seo, Elijah Bell, Charlotte von Gall, and Choogon
Lee. 2008. "Strong Resetting of the Mammalian Clock by Constant Light
Followed by Constant Darkness." *The Journal of Neuroscience: The
Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience* 28 (46): 11839--47.
<https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2191-08.2008>.

Chou, Thomas C., Thomas E. Scammell, Joshua J. Gooley, Stephanie E.
Gaus, Clifford B. Saper, and Jun Lu. 2003. "[Critical Role of
Dorsomedial Hypothalamic Nucleus in a Wide Range of Behavioral Circadian
Rhythms](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6740926)." *The
Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for
Neuroscience* 23 (33): 10691--702.

Cirelli, Chiara, and Giulio Tononi. 2008. "Is Sleep Essential?" *PLOS
Biology* 6 (8): e216. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0060216>.

Colwell, Christopher S. 2011. "Linking Neural Activity and Molecular
Oscillations in the SCN." *Nature Reviews. Neuroscience* 12 (10):
553--69. <https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3086>.

Coomans, Claudia P., Sjoerd A. A. van den Berg, Thijs Houben, Jan-Bert
van Klinken, Rosa van den Berg, Amanda C. M. Pronk, Louis M. Havekes, et
al. 2013. "Detrimental Effects of Constant Light Exposure and High-Fat
Diet on Circadian Energy Metabolism and Insulin Sensitivity." *FASEB
Journal: Official Publication of the Federation of American Societies
for Experimental Biology* 27 (4): 1721--32.
<https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.12-210898>.

Daan, S., D. G. Beersma, and A. A. Borbély. 1984. "Timing of Human
Sleep: Recovery Process Gated by a Circadian Pacemaker." *The American
Journal of Physiology* 246 (February): R161--183.
<https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1984.246.2.R161>.

Deboer, Tom. 2009. "Sleep and Sleep Homeostasis in Constant Darkness in
the Rat." *Journal of Sleep Research* 18 (3): 357--64.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2869.2008.00728.x>.

---------. 2015. "Behavioral and Electrophysiological Correlates of
Sleep and Sleep Homeostasis." *Current Topics in Behavioral
Neurosciences* 25: 1--24. <https://doi.org/10.1007/7854_2013_248>.

---------. 2018. "Sleep Homeostasis and the Circadian Clock: Do the
Circadian Pacemaker and the Sleep Homeostat Influence Each Other's
Functioning?" *Neurobiology of Sleep and Circadian Rhythms* 5 (June):
68--77. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbscr.2018.02.003>.

Deboer, Tom, Mariska J. Vansteensel, László Détári, and Johanna H.
Meijer. 2003. "Sleep States Alter Activity of Suprachiasmatic Nucleus
Neurons." *Nature Neuroscience* 6 (10): 1086--90.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1122>.

Dijk, Derk-Jan, and Charles A. Czeisler. 1994. "Paradoxical Timing of
the Circadian Rhythm of Sleep Propensity Serves to Consolidate Sleep and
Wakefulness in Humans." *Neuroscience Letters* 166 (1): 63--68.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3940(94)90841-9>.

Eastman, Charmane, and Allan Rechtschaffen. 1983. "Circadian Temperature
and Wake Rhythms of Rats Exposed to Prolonged Continuous Illumination."
*Physiology & Behavior* 31 (4): 417--27.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/0031-9384(83)90061-6>.

Easton, Amy, Peter Meerlo, Bernard Bergmann, and Fred W. Turek. 2004.
"The Suprachiasmatic Nucleus Regulates Sleep Timing and Amount in Mice."
*Sleep* 27 (7): 1307--18. <https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/27.7.1307>.

Edgar, D. M., W. C. Dement, and C. A. Fuller. 1993. "Effect of SCN
Lesions on Sleep in Squirrel Monkeys: Evidence for Opponent Processes in
Sleep-Wake Regulation." *The Journal of Neuroscience: The Official
Journal of the Society for Neuroscience* 13 (3): 1065--79.

Everson, C. A. 1995. "Functional Consequences of Sustained Sleep
Deprivation in the Rat." *Behavioural Brain Research* 69 (1-2): 43--54.

Fisher, Simon P., Nanyi Cui, Laura E. McKillop, Jessica Gemignani, David
M. Bannerman, Peter L. Oliver, Stuart N. Peirson, and Vladyslav V.
Vyazovskiy. 2016. "Stereotypic Wheel Running Decreases Cortical Activity
in Mice." *Nature Communications* 7 (October): 13138.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms13138>.

Fishman, Ross, and Howard P. Roffwarg. 1972. "REM Sleep Inhibition by
Light in the Albino Rat." *Experimental Neurology* 36 (1): 166--78.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-4886(72)90144-6>.

Guillaumin, Mathilde C C, Laura E McKillop, Nanyi Cui, Simon P Fisher,
Russell G Foster, Maarten de Vos, Stuart N Peirson, Peter Achermann, and
Vladyslav V Vyazovskiy. 2018. "Cortical Region--Specific Sleep
Homeostasis in Mice: Effects of Time of Day and Waking Experience."
*Sleep* 41 (7). <https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsy079>.

Herzog, Erik D., Tracey Hermanstyne, Nicola J. Smyllie, and Michael H.
Hastings. 2017. "Regulating the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus (SCN) Circadian
Clockwork: Interplay Between Cell-Autonomous and Circuit-Level
Mechanisms." *Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology* 9 (1):
a027706. <https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a027706>.

Huber, Reto, Giulio Tononi, and Chiara Cirelli. 2007. "Exploratory
Behavior, Cortical BDNF Expression, and Sleep Homeostasis." *Sleep* 30
(2): 129--39. <https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/30.2.129>.

Hughes, Alun T. L., Cara. L. Croft, Rayna E. Samuels, Jihwan Myung, Toru
Takumi, and Hugh D. Piggins. 2015. "Constant Light Enhances Synchrony
Among Circadian Clock Cells and Promotes Behavioral Rhythms in
VPAC2-Signaling Deficient Mice." *Scientific Reports* 5 (September).
<https://doi.org/10.1038/srep14044>.

Ikeda, Masayuki, Masami Sagara, and Shojiro Inoué. 2000. "Continuous
Exposure to Dim Illumination Uncouples Temporal Patterns of Sleep, Body
Temperature, Locomotion and Drinking Behavior in the Rat." *Neuroscience
Letters* 279 (3): 185--89.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3940(99)00943-X>.

Jones, Jeff R., Michael C. Tackenberg, and Douglas G. McMahon. 2015.
"Manipulating Circadian Clock Neuron Firing Rate Resets Molecular
Circadian Rhythms and Behavior." *Nature Neuroscience* 18 (3): 373--75.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3937>.

Larkin, Jennie E., Tohei Yokogawa, H. Craig Heller, Paul Franken, and
Norman F. Ruby. 2004. "Homeostatic Regulation of Sleep in Arrhythmic
Siberian Hamsters." *American Journal of Physiology. Regulatory,
Integrative and Comparative Physiology* 287 (1): R104--111.
<https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.00676.2003>.

Lee, Michael L., Beryl E. Swanson, and Horacio O. de la Iglesia. 2009.
"Circadian Timing of REM Sleep Is Coupled to an Oscillator Within the
Dorsomedial Suprachiasmatic Nucleus." *Current Biology: CB* 19 (10):
848--52. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.03.051>.

Lobo, L. L., B. Claustrat, G. Debilly, L. Paut-Pagano, M. Jouvet, and J.
L. Valatx. 1999. "Hypoprolactinemic Rats Under Conditions of Constant
Darkness or Constant Light. Effects on the Sleep-Wake Cycle, Cerebral
Temperature and Sulfatoxymelatonin Levels." *Brain Research* 835 (2):
282--89. <https://doi.org/10.1016/s0006-8993(99)01608-x>.

Loh, Dawn H., Juliana Navarro, Arkady Hagopian, Louisa M. Wang, Tom
Deboer, and Christopher S. Colwell. 2010. "Rapid Changes in the
Light/Dark Cycle Disrupt Memory of Conditioned Fear in Mice." *PloS One*
5 (9). <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0012546>.

Lu, J., Y. H. Zhang, T. C. Chou, S. E. Gaus, J. K. Elmquist, P.
Shiromani, and C. B. Saper. 2001. "[Contrasting Effects of Ibotenate
Lesions of the Paraventricular Nucleus and Subparaventricular Zone on
Sleep-Wake Cycle and Temperature
Regulation](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3508730)." *The
Journal of Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for
Neuroscience* 21 (13): 4864--74.

Lupi, Daniela, Henrik Oster, Stewart Thompson, and Russell G. Foster.
2008. "The Acute Light-Induction of Sleep Is Mediated by OPN4-Based
Photoreception." *Nature Neuroscience* 11 (9): 1068--73.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2179>.

Mazuski, Cristina, John H. Abel, Samantha P. Chen, Tracey O.
Hermanstyne, Jeff R. Jones, Tatiana Simon, Francis J. Doyle, and Erik D.
Herzog. 2018. "Entrainment of Circadian Rhythms Depends on Firing Rates
and Neuropeptide Release of VIP SCN Neurons." *Neuron* 99 (3):
555--563.e5. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.06.029>.

Meir H. Kryger, Thomas Roth, and William C. Dement, eds. 2017.
*Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine*. Elsevier.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/C2012-0-03543-0>.

Mistlberger, Ralph E. 2005. "Circadian Regulation of Sleep in Mammals:
Role of the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus." *Brain Research. Brain Research
Reviews* 49 (3): 429--54.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresrev.2005.01.005>.

Mitler, M. M., R. Lund, P. G. Sokolove, C. S. Pittendrigh, and W. C.
Dement. 1977. "Sleep and Activity Rhythms in Mice: A Description of
Circadian Patterns and Unexpected Disruptions in Sleep." *Brain
Research* 131 (1): 129--45.

Muindi, Fanuel, Jamie M. Zeitzer, Damien Colas, and H. Craig Heller.
2013. "The Acute Effects of Light on Murine Sleep During the Dark Phase:
Importance of Melanopsin for Maintenance of Light-Induced Sleep." *The
European Journal of Neuroscience* 37 (11): 1727--36.
<https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.12189>.

Muindi, Fanuel, Jamie M. Zeitzer, and Horace Craig Heller. 2014.
"Retino-Hypothalamic Regulation of Light-Induced Murine Sleep."
*Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience* 8.
<https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2014.00135>.

Muñoz, Marta, Stuart N. Peirson, Mark W. Hankins, and Russell G. Foster.
2005. "Long-Term Constant Light Induces Constitutive Elevated Expression
of mPER2 Protein in the Murine SCN: A Molecular Basis for Aschoff's
Rule?" *Journal of Biological Rhythms* 20 (1): 3--14.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730404272858>.

Northeast, Rebecca C., Yige Huang, Laura E. McKillop, David A. Bechtold,
Stuart N. Peirson, Hugh D. Piggins, and Vladyslav V. Vyazovskiy. 2019.
"Sleep Homeostasis During Daytime Food Entrainment in Mice." *Sleep*,
July. <https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsz157>.

Ohta, Hidenobu, Shin Yamazaki, and Douglas G. McMahon. 2005. "Constant
Light Desynchronizes Mammalian Clock Neurons." *Nature Neuroscience* 8
(3): 267--69. <https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1395>.

Peirson, Stuart N., Laurence A. Brown, Carina A. Pothecary, Lindsay A.
Benson, and Angus S. Fisk. 2018. "Light and the Laboratory Mouse."
*Journal of Neuroscience Methods* 300 (April): 26--36.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2017.04.007>.

Porkka-Heiskanen, Tarja. 2013. "Sleep Homeostasis." *Current Opinion in
Neurobiology* 23 (5): 799--805.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2013.02.010>.

Ralph, M. R., R. G. Foster, F. C. Davis, and M. Menaker. 1990.
"Transplanted Suprachiasmatic Nucleus Determines Circadian Period."
*Science (New York, N.Y.)* 247 (4945): 975--78.

Rempe, Michael J., Janne Grønli, Torhild Thue Pedersen, Jelena Mrdalj,
Andrea Marti, Peter Meerlo, and Jonathan P. Wisor. 2018. "Mathematical
Modeling of Sleep State Dynamics in a Rodent Model of Shift Work."
*Neurobiology of Sleep and Circadian Rhythms* 5 (June): 37--51.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbscr.2018.04.002>.

Rupp, Alan C., Michelle Ren, Cara M. Altimus, Diego C. Fernandez,
Melissa Richardson, Fred Turek, Samer Hattar, and Tiffany M. Schmidt.
2019. "Distinct ipRGC Subpopulations Mediate Light's Acute and Circadian
Effects on Body Temperature and Sleep." *eLife* 8 (July).
<https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.44358>.

Scammell, Thomas E., Elda Arrigoni, and Jonathan O. Lipton. 2017.
"Neural Circuitry of Wakefulness and Sleep." *Neuron* 93 (4): 747--65.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.01.014>.

Schwartz, Michael D., and Thomas S. Kilduff. 2015. "THE NEUROBIOLOGY OF
SLEEP AND WAKEFULNESS." *The Psychiatric Clinics of North America* 38
(4): 615--44. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psc.2015.07.002>.

Silver, R., J. LeSauter, P. A. Tresco, and M. N. Lehman. 1996. "A
Diffusible Coupling Signal from the Transplanted Suprachiasmatic Nucleus
Controlling Circadian Locomotor Rhythms." *Nature* 382 (6594): 810--13.
<https://doi.org/10.1038/382810a0>.

Sollars, Patricia J., and Gary E. Pickard. 2015. "The Neurobiology of
Circadian Rhythms." *The Psychiatric Clinics of North America* 38 (4):
645--65. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psc.2015.07.003>.

Stephenson, Richard, Joonbum Lim, Svetlana Famina, Aimee M. Caron, and
Harold B. Dowse. 2012. "Sleep-Wake Behavior in the Rat: Ultradian
Rhythms in a Light-Dark Cycle and Continuous Bright Light." *Journal of
Biological Rhythms* 27 (6): 490--501.
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0748730412461247>.

Sudo, M, K Sasahara, T Moriya, M Akiyama, T Hamada, and S Shibata. 2003.
"Constant Light Housing Attenuates Circadian Rhythms of mPer2 mRNA AND
mPER2 Protein Expression in the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus of Mice."
*Neuroscience* 121 (2): 493--99.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S0306-4522(03)00457-3>.

Tononi, Giulio, and Chiara Cirelli. 2003. "Sleep and Synaptic
Homeostasis: A Hypothesis." *Brain Research Bulletin* 62 (2): 143--50.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2003.09.004>.

Trachsel, L., D. M. Edgar, W. F. Seidel, H. C. Heller, and W. C. Dement.
1992. "Sleep Homeostasis in Suprachiasmatic Nuclei-Lesioned Rats:
Effects of Sleep Deprivation and Triazolam Administration." *Brain
Research* 589 (2): 253--61.

Tsai, Jessica W., Jens Hannibal, Grace Hagiwara, Damien Colas, Elisabeth
Ruppert, Norman F. Ruby, H. Craig Heller, Paul Franken, and Patrice
Bourgin. 2009. "Melanopsin as a Sleep Modulator: Circadian Gating of the
Direct Effects of Light on Sleep and Altered Sleep Homeostasis in
Opn4−/− Mice." *PLOS Biology* 7 (6): e1000125.
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1000125>.

Vyazovskiy, V. V., P. Achermann, and I. Tobler. 2007. "Sleep Homeostasis
in the Rat in the Light and Dark Period." *Brain Research Bulletin* 74
(1-3): 37--44. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresbull.2007.05.001>.

Vyazovskiy, Vladyslav V. 2015. "Sleep, Recovery, and Metaregulation:
Explaining the Benefits of Sleep." *Nature and Science of Sleep* 7
(December): 171--84. <https://doi.org/10.2147/NSS.S54036>.

Watts, A. G., L. W. Swanson, and G. Sanchez-Watts. 1987. "Efferent
Projections of the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: I. Studies Using Anterograde
Transport of Phaseolus Vulgaris Leucoagglutinin in the Rat." *The
Journal of Comparative Neurology* 258 (2): 204--29.
<https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.902580204>.
